Dec 21, 2009
Required Viewing: "Star Wars: The Phantom Menace" 70-min Critique
https://www.mentalfloss.com/article/23558/required-viewing-star-wars-phantom-menace-70-min-critique

Over the past week, I've been told over and over to watch this series of videos, but resisted until the weekend. I mean, how could it truly be so awesome?
I don't care about Star Wars, why would I find this funny? 70 minutes?
How could I find time for this?
I can now only regret those long days that I deprived myself of the wonderousness of this bizarre, hilariously nerdy "review" of Star Wars: The Phantom Menace.
I debated posting it here because it does use some spicy language (within ten seconds, the first f-bomb is dropped), but guys, come on.
You need to watch this.
You'll know within the first few minutes whether it's your kind of thing.
And if it is, you've got SEVENTY MINUTES OF IT.

Let me break it down for you: this dude makes movie reviews and puts them up on YouTube.
He's been doing it for a while (I strongly recommend his 2008 review of Star Trek: Generations, which came roughly 14 years after the film was released).
Through the reviews, you see his analysis of each movie's particular failings, including detailed analyses of plot holes and explanations of how to make film -- in case George Lucas is watching.

Meanwhile, you realize that the reviewer is also playing a character, and he reveals bits of his character within each review.
(Talking about various deceased family members, etc.)
At various points the review falls off the rails entirely, as in Part 2 (below) when the reviewer rants about his "medications" and then offers to mail pizza rolls to anyone who leaves a comment on "this web zone."
It's brilliant.
Funny, often inappropriate, genuinely insightful -- what more could you want from a web video?

Tip: if you are not immediately hooked, wait at least until he says "protagonist" for the second or third time.
Trust me.
If you get through all seven parts, maybe you can get yourself a pizza roll.
