Jan 20, 2010
Who says criticism is dead? On video essays, mash-ups and "The Phantom Menace Review."
https://archive.is/hWazH (ifc.com)

“‘Star Wars: The Phantom Menace’ was the most disappointing thing since my son.”

That’s the daffy opening line of filmmaker Mike Stoklasa’s “‘Star Wars: The Phantom Menace’ Review,” an insightful, rudely funny takedown of George Lucas’ prequel.
And it’s as good a place as any to start an appreciation of a hybrid of the video essay and the mash-up — an emerging format that’s often more entertaining than the work it cannibalizes.

Let’s start by distinguishing straightforward mash-ups and video essays from works created by Stoklasa and his siblings-in-spirit.
The term “mash-up” was first applied to musical works that combined existing pieces of recording music in order to create something new.
The YouTube equivalent is defined by Wikipedia as a work that “combines “multiple sources of video — which often have no relation to each other — into a derivative work, often lampooning its component sources or another text.” (Examples include those now-ubiquitous clips in which somebody puts, say, Joe Pesci’s “Funny how?” monologue from “Goodfellas” into the mouth of Elmo, or turns Stanley Kubrick’s “The Shining” into a heartwarming family comedy with music cues by Peter Gabriel and Thomas Newman.)

Video essays, on the other hand, tend to be more straightforwardly analytical: criticism in pictures.
Their theatrical forerunner is the “essay film,” a ruminative, often first person nonfiction format practiced by Jean-Luc Godard, Chris Marker, Werner Herzog, Ross McElwee, Chantal Akerman and Agnès Varda, among other notable directors.
Some of the more striking examples concentrate on film history and theory: Mark Rappaport’s documentary-drama hybrids, for instance, and Thom Andersen’s film and architecture meditation “Los Angeles Plays Itself.”

In the YouTube age, the video essay evolved into film criticism written with pictures.
The format’s digital-era pioneer is my colleague and occasional collaborator Kevin B. Lee, whose analytical/historical pieces inspired me to do my own video essays for The L Magazine and Moving Image Source.
Other committed practitioners include Eric Faden, Jim Emerson, Christian Keathley; Ben Sampson, who’s done superb breakdowns of “A.I.” and “F for Fake”, and Sophie Fiennes, who put Slovenian philosopher and psychoanalyst Slavoj Žižek at the center of “A Pervert’s Guide to Cinema.”

But while the terms “mash-up” and “video essay” cover a fair bit of ground, they don’t capture the peculiar intensity of the hybrid filmmakers I’m spotlighting here.

The best work by my colleague Steven Boone, for instance, evades such labels the way The Flash ducks bullets.
His pieces always have a critical purpose, and sometimes Boone foregrounds it — as in the plainly titled “Low-Budget Eye Candy #1″, which annotates a chase scene from George Lucas’ 1971 debut “THX 1138″ to show how a clever director can make a cheap film look pricey.

But other Boone essays are more confounding and poetic.
They combine movie scenes, news clips, pop music cues, on-screen text and voiceover narration to create stylish shorts that can be enjoyed as both digital-era criticism and freestanding art.
Boone’s “Wolf City High and Low” for example, doesn’t just quote “Woodstock” director Michael Wadleigh’s 1981 horror flick “Wolfen,” about Native American werewolf spirits stalking 20th century New Yorkers; it stirs Ennio Morricone’s score for “Violent City” (1970) and audio from local TV news reports into the mix, sketching 21st century New York as a hellhole in which the rich treat the poor like animals.

“I am just using pieces of media to describe the sense of ‘two New Yorks’ or ‘two Americas’ that folks always talk about in solemn, wary tones, but which I experience every day and find pleasantly hallucinogenic,” Boone says.

“Notes for a David Lynch Adaptation of ‘Moonwalk’” is even more striking.
Boone uses ripped DVD imagery, still photos and bits of Jackson interviews culled from YouTube to argue that Lynch is the ideal director to film Michael Jackson’s memoir.
The piece risks sensory overload, combining fragments of audio interviews, text quotes from Jackson’s book and scenes and music cues lifted from “The Elephant Man,” “The Straight Story,” “Eraserhead,” “Mulholland Dr.” and Lynch’s short “The Grandmother.”
The various elements swarm across the screen, piling atop each other like an anguished dreamer’s thoughts.

“The ‘Moonwalk’ piece was simply my reaction to Michael’s death and his 1988 autobiography, which I read shortly afterward,” Boone says.
“The book was mostly polished public relations, but a lot of the guy’s pain and confusion leaked through. I wanted to stick up for him as a person who seemed to strive for purity and grace, and for David Lynch as an artistic soulmate in that regard.”

Speaking of anguished dreamers: Lynch would appreciate the gutbucket craziness of Damon Packard.
The L.A.-based filmmaker’s work has mash-up and video essay qualities, but it operates on its own frequency, interweaving original material with bits from TV ads, local cable shows, Hollywood blockbusters and underground movies.
Packard’s YouTube channel is a grab bag of work-for-hire and personal projects, including pieces of his 2002 horror film “Reflections of Evil.”
But whether he directed a particular work for himself or someone else, his personality always comes through — and not just because Packard acts in his own films, often casting himself as a insane fringe-dweller, a slapstick clown or some combination.
(Packard also played L. Ron Hubbard in “Mock Up and Mu” (2008), a hallucinogenic “biography” of the Scientology founder.)
His YouTube shorts critique Hollywood notions of professionalism, beauty and pleasure by juxtaposing them against amateurism, insanity and pain.

To that end, Packard’s “Indiana Jones Trailer Rejected by Lucasfilm” highlights the franchise’s comic book version of white supremacy by syncing an Indy trailer’s soundtrack to scenes from Bertrand Tavernier’s “Coup de Torchon” (1981), a sweaty drama about a vicious cop (Philippe Noiret) wreaking vengeance on his enemies in French colonial Senegal.

Packard’s “Untitled Star Wars Mockumentary Trailer” merges DVD supplement footage of George Lucas blathering about the marvels of all-digital filmmaking with snippets from the “Star Wars” series, other fantasy films, blaxploitation pictures, pornography and inserts of a wild-eyed Packard waving his hands like a sorcerer.
The short opens with the “Apocalypse Now” scene in which Capt. Willard receives his mission, suggesting that Lucas is Hollywood’s version of Col. Kurtz — a once-gifted man who went mad and withdrew into a private kingdom full of worshippers.

Packard’s mock trailer for “Mission Impossible III” puts the villain’s most hateful monologue in the mouth of an infant, and spoofs the movie’s anything-for-an-adrenaline-rush mentality with quick-cut shots of the trailer’s portly, balding hero sprinting through a park and rolling on the sidewalk while firing a laser pistol.

Packard’s work reserves special outrage for Hollywood’s sense of entitlement — the mentality that expects regular ticket buyers to enjoy the sight of heroes strutting through life, barking out orders and treating social inferiors like shit.
“Grizzly Redux,” for instance, takes a hackneyed scene from the “Jaws” rip-off “Grizzly” in which Christopher George’s macho sheriff chews out an underling over the phone, and imagines the other end of the conversation: an overworked, unappreciated deputy demanding to be treated with respect.
(“I’m gonna be on the unemployment line? Who the fuck do you think you are, buddy?”)

“Damon Packard is a genius,” Boone says.
“His movies are about all those earthy textures and silly dreams and schlocky thrills being quietly disappeared in the new globalized, power-obsessed media scheme.
It was always about power, but now absolutely every image is micromanaged to express nothing but power, domination, mania.”

Packard’s hybrid shorts “...clearly have the ‘video essay’ value of communicating their worldview — albeit quite indirectly, through parody,” says Catherine Grant, a research fellow at the School of Film and Media at the University of Sussex and publisher of the blog Film Studies for Free.
“And their target — the unbelievably smug and vacuous promotional culture of mainstream film — is very well chosen and also well hit.”

“I’ve become known as a mash-up person even though it’s not something that interests me,” says Packard.
“I’d be the reluctant mash-up person, if anything.
A mash-up artist in my mind is somebody who fabricates something entirely out of found footage.
There are a lot of people on the Web doing that, and some of them are very good editors, like the people that made the re-cut ‘Shining’ trailer and the one that turned ‘Mary Poppins’ into a Lionsgate horror movie.
But I was never that guy, and there’s so much of that sort of thing on YouTube now that it’s become kind of pointless.”

Asked to characterize his own work, Packard says, “It’s as if somebody like Spielberg had never had a successful career and instead ended up on YouTube. It’s the failed Spielberg.”

Mike Stoklasa is more interested in the failed Lucas.
YouTube videomakers have long been obsessed with the “Star Wars” director and his prequels, and a fair share of their output has been skeptical or critical; see the above-linked “Untitled Star Wars Mockumentary Trailer” and Boone’s “THX 1138″ essay, which indirectly attacks Lucas’ recent work by showing what he was able to do with real locations and little money.
But Stoklasa — who warmed up to “The Phantom Menace” review with similarly thorough takedowns of “Star Trek: Insurrection” and “Star Trek: Nemesis” — takes anti-Lucas sentiment to a surreal new level.
His “Phantom Menace” review is a deep-dish analysis packaged like a gonzo stand-up comedy routine — a seven-part, 70-minute dismantling of one film that doubles as an attack on visual excess in the digital age, and the replacement of storytelling with spectacle.

The opus begins by stating that narrative films need a protagonist to make viewers care about what happens, and “The Phantom Menace” not only doesn’t have one, it doesn’t have characters.
To prove his point, the narrator asks several friends to describe major characters in the franchise to a hypothetical viewer that has never seen a “Star Wars” movie.
They have no trouble describing characters in the original trilogy, but fall back on physical details when describing characters in the prequels: Han Solo is a cocksure rogue who has a problem with authority; Qui-Gon Jinn has a beard and a ponytail.
(See the clip below, at the 6:50 mark.)

Part seven of the series explores “The Ending Multiplication Effect” — Lucas’ tendency to add more parallel narratives to the climax of each successive “Star Wars” film (one line of action in “A New Hope,” two in “The Empire Strikes Back,” three in “The Return of the Jedi,” four in “The Phantom Menace”), diluting storytelling momentum and audience enthusiasm.
Clever split-screen effects illustrate his gripes; the end of “A New Hope” fills up the viewing window, while the four lines of action that climax of “The Phantom Menace” are contained in shrunken rectangles butted together like bathroom floor tiles.

If “The Phantom Menace Review” were just film criticism plus armchair psychoanalysis, it would be plenty fascinating.
What makes it brilliant is the voiceover narration, which creates an alter ego for Stoklasa more compelling than any character in the film being criticized: a cranky, depressed shut-in who offers to send pizza rolls to viewers; confuses the Cuban Missile Crisis with World War I; brags that he’s never read a book and isn’t about to start, and might be somewhere around 110 years old (if we’re to take a side comment about Lucas basing “Star Wars” on Saturday morning serials, “the kind I used to watch when I was in my 40s,” at face value).

Judging from the human remains and terrified hostages glimpsed in the narrator’s basement, he may also be a serial killer.
Between the character’s ignorance (he pronounces “protagonist” as “prota-GOAN-us”) and hints of murderous alienation, it’s as if Stoklasa is saying that only an illiterate psychotic would spend so much time thinking about “Star Wars.” Or as Grant puts it, it’s both “a compelling, well put together and useful audiovisual review of ‘The Phantom Menace’ and an incredibly thorough parody of a review — it musters a very clever attack on a certain kind of dumbass fanboy style of film reviewing.”

But the Milwaukee-based filmmaker says he’s not making fun of the “Star Wars” audience — just looking for a way to make an exhaustive analysis watchable.

“Before I started this thing, I had 24 pages of material written on ‘The Phantom Menace,’ single spaced,” he says.
“If the presentation is too straight, nobody’s going to watch something like that.”

He is worried, however, that increasingly sophisticated technology and ballooning budgets have dumbed down cinema, and made viewers at once less sophisticated and more jaded.

“‘Avatar’ is amazing visually, but when it was over, the guy behind me shouted ‘That was corny crap! That sucked!’” Stoklasa says.
“$400 million dollars worth of special effects, and the guy dismisses it like that.
It tells you how desensitized to special effects we are at that point, where even the best special effects don’t seem that special anymore.
That’s what George Lucas has brought us.
I mean, people tell me, ‘You’re really good at critiquing movies,’ when here I am pointing out that a movie needs to have a protagonist.
I kind of fear for the future.”
