May 28, 2010
A redneck sinks George Lucas
https://archive.vn/23OJ3 (elpais.com)

"The Phantom Menace is the biggest disappointment I've had since my son. Only my son ended up hanging himself in a gas station bathroom and the prequels to Star Wars will be there forever."
You listen to it like this, out of the blue, after clicking on one of the most viewed videos on YouTube, and not wanting to stay to see what's next.
Star Wars: The Phantom Menace Review is a review, 10 years later, of the (many) conceptual failures of the last three installments of the George Lucas saga.
An impossible phenomenon that already drags three million viewers.

Blame it on Mike Stoklasa.
Six months ago, this 30-year-old's was a name that, if you lived in Wisconsin, you would still see in the credits of your cousin's wedding video.
Today he has the most viewed channel on YouTube last month.
The Huffington Post asks for a television show.
He has been invited as a lecturer to various universities.
Your secret? The collective hatred.
"Many terrible movies break our hearts because they are from our favorite filmmakers. I wanted to retaliate with videos that showed their faults, with a catharsis, "he explains from Milwaukee.
Those Lucas prequels were especially painful for him.
"I don't see that they stand out in anything except being bad," he ditched with rancor.
Fortunately for him, millions of equally hurt fans were looking for someone to lead their grudge.

And that someone was Mr. Plinkett, his alter ego.
"The inner voice of my pain," he clarifies.
To narrate the matter, Stoklasa imitates a redneck from the south of the United States, a lost psychopath, who addresses the prostitutes that he has kidnapped in his house, detailing the torment caused by poorly made films.
"It allows me to improvise on my scripts, and it is much more entertaining than having to listen to myself speak for an hour or so."
Mr. Plinkett likes to rant, give advice on how to murder using a Raid bug spray, and insult screenwriters.

But YouTube is full of geeks and their spiel.
Stoklasa decided to give it a twist and soaked up the other fashionable resource: the mash-up (taking several scenes from the same movie and creating a new meaning).
So you end up rewatching those scenes that never fit, but this time they tell you why.
"It's not that I set out to 'hey, I'm going to invent a new form of film criticism.'

* This article appeared in the print edition of Friday, May 28, 2010
