Jun 26, 2012
Mike Stoklasa: Not a Snarky, Complaining, Armchair Critic? Come On!
https://archive.vn/2R0qf (github.com)
https://www.facebook.com/redlettermedia/posts/256406461139928
http://web.archive.org/web/20140427083659/http://www.geekexchange.com/not-a-snarky-complaining-armchair-critic-come-on-33425.html

Mike Stoklasa’s scathingly smart movie reviews have shoved him into the spotlight.
It’s a struggle to throw a rock these days without hitting an Internet movie critic (which is why you should always throw hard), but Milwaukee, Wisconsin-based Mike Stoklasa has managed to carve out an impressive rep as one of the best and most controversial.
While many Web critics rely solely on their typing skills and spellcheck, Stoklasa’s elaborate, cleverly edited video reviews — merging film clips with produced comedy segments and graphics, often running almost as long as the features being examined — expertly blend sophomoric shock humor with crushing Cahiers du Cinema-level analysis.
As a result, his critiques are as caustic and funny as they are dead-on right.
Stoklasa launched his career as a critic somewhat by accident in 2008.
Employing his own filmmaking skills — polished at Chicago’s Columbia College and while running his indie video production outfit RedLetterMedia — his first examination took on Star Trek: Generations, which Stoklasa saw as a betrayal of everything he’d loved about the Star Trek: The Next Generation TV series.
As his opening narration notes, “[It’s] the stupidest movie ever made.
It ruined everything.
Not just Star Trek movies, but everything.” Posted on YouTube in two parts, the 19:45 of pointed barbs, clever visual comparisons and keen observations made Stoklasa’s screed worth watching.
As a result of that cathartic experience (and positive feedback), Stoklasa tackled other Trek franchise films, perfecting his technique — and fully developing the personality of his scabrous onscreen alter ego, Harry S. Plinkett — before taking on the most pointlessly controversial film of the last decade: Star Wars: Episode I – The Phantom Menace.
After being posted to YouTube in the spring of 2010, the nine-part, primal-scream postmortem of Menace went viral, instantly cementing Stoklasa’s place in fandom history.
Equally funny/brutal/smart reviews skewering Attack of the Clones and Revenge of the Sith followed, proving Stoklasa was no one-hit wonder, and probably knocking him off the Lucasfilm Christmas card list forever.
To capitalize on his success and surging site traffic, Stoklasa launched the sitcom-style film review show Half in the Bag in early 2011, which he co-hosts with friend and fellow filmmaker Jay Bauman.
In it, they play a pair of inebriated VCR repairmen who discuss the latest releases, their extemporaneous shtick punctuated by scripted comedy bits.
A timelier supplement to the slow-to-produce Plinkett reviews, the show’s reception was mixed at first, with comments ranging from “I liked it!
I hope you guys can become critics on Rotten Tomatoes!” to “Are you guys out of your minds? This was absolute ASS.”
Regardless, Stoklasa recently posted the 29th episode of Half in the Bag, as well as a revised version of his Phantom Menace opus (in 3D, no less) and a full 72-minute Plinkett review of Indiana Jones and the Kingdom of the Crystal Skull.
Stoklasa recently took time out to answer a few of our questions about comtedy, copyright issues and what it takes to be a critic.

G(EEK): The job of TV film critic used to be a fairly respected one, making minor celebrities out of Gene Siskel and Roger Ebert and their many imitators.
G: But the Internet basically killed that gig and diminished the power of individual critics.
G: Is that a tragedy or is the composite score on Rotten Tomatoes really a better barometer for where I should put my $12?
S(toklasa): I never really followed movie critics or had any interest in reviewing movies.
S: I still don’t, honestly!
S: I’m from Chicago, so I would always read Roger Ebert in the Chicago Sun-Times, but I never gave it much thought.
S: In fact, I never knew reviewing movies was really a “thing” on the Internet when I made the first Plinkett review.
S: I just made that first review [of Star Trek: Generations] as a fun time-killer thing to entertain myself.
S: I do like Rotten Tomatoes and I like the collective percentage system they have.
S: Having so many movie critics now, it seems to make sense to get some kind of average.
S: That and the fact that now you can get the opinions of critics around the world as opposed to just a local voice as was the case before the Internet.
G: There’s a distinct brand of surreal/absurdist humor that runs through your reviews.
G: Who do you tag as influences?
G: John Waters?
S: Jay [Bauman] is really influenced by Waters and introduced me to a lot of his stuff, but I was never into him too much, although I do love Pink Flamingos.
S: A misconception about me is that I’m a huge movie buff.
S: I went to film school and I have seen a fair amount of films and have some knowledge, but I really don’t watch movies very often.
S: Or didn’t, I should say.
S: I get impatient and have horrible anxiety issues, so I find it hard to sit still at home and watch a movie because I like to keep busy.
S: I love watching movies in the theater, though, because you’re dedicated to doing it.
S: Outside that environment, there are just too many distractions.
S: I grew up with 1980s movies that are permanently burned into my brain: Star Wars, Star Trek, Gremlins, Critters, Back to the Future, Aliens, Indiana Jones, RoboCop, Die Hard, etc.
S: I guess you could say Spielberg was a huge influence, although the filth I produce is nothing close to Spielbergian.
S: I just have this dry, sarcastic type of humor and I like making people laugh via unconventional methods.
S: The way of doing that just seems to have gravitated more toward making movies.
G: Your Star Wars prequel reviews get most of the attention, but the Cop Dog review is clearly the most brutal and damning of all.
S: How many people do you think gave up on watching it too soon and didn’t get the payoff?
S: Ah, Cop Dog.
S: Originally it was just a gag in an earlier video I did.
S: I never actually meant to review it, but then I saw it and it was pretty horrible.
S: We watched it on the way back from the Toronto Comic-Con in the car, and I was surprised I could do an actual Plinkett review on it — or even wanted to do one.
S: I watched a handful of kid dog movies and most are just OK and not really worthy of commentary, but Cop Dog just plain sucks, so it was a lot of fun to review.
S: That and Baby’s Day Out.
S: There are a few different types of people who watch the Plinkett reviews: some who just enjoy whatever I make and some who really want Plinkett to stick to the sci-fi and fantasy type movies and film series.
S: So every so often, it’s nice to throw out a curveball for fun to annoy people.
S: I get emails saying, “Please don’t waste your efforts on reviewing pointless movies!
S: Review The Matrix sequels” or whatever, and I just shrug.
G: Aside from the Star Wars prequel, you’ve tackled Indiana Jones and the Kingdom of the Crystal Skull, as well as covered The People vs. George Lucas and Red Tails in excruciating detail on Half in the Bag.
G: At what point will you overload on talking about George Lucas’ contributions to modern cinema?
S: I’m at the breaking point with talking about George Lucas.
S: It does get tiring, but he’s a fascinating person and people love to complain endlessly about Star Wars.
S: There is a disappointment in the new films and the changes to the old ones, but I’ve never been super passionate about it.
S: I find it more fun to just analyze and examine them.
S: Lucas’ motivations are a mystery to me and some of the stuff he’s been saying lately is odd as well.
S: He needs a big hug!
S: I would love to hug George Lucas!
S: People get too angry about movies now.
S: Everything is over-rated, everything is either terrible or didn’t live up to expectations.
S: I’m really not that guy.
S: I’m not a snarky, complaining, armchair movie critic.
S: I just play one on the Internet.
G: A lot of your site users suggest films for you to review.
G: Do you care?
S: Nope!
S: I get so many suggestions all the time, but it’ll always come down to if I can make it funny and if I have something interesting I want to say about a movie.
G: I can’t imagine there were demands for the Baby’s Day Out review, but it’s one of your most entertaining.
S: Baby’s Day Out was one of those movies where it seemed all the pieces would make it work, but in the end it just fell flat and movies like that are fun to figure out why.
S: Instead of just saying something is terrible, it’s more interesting to figure out what the reasons are.
S: Baby’s Day Out is a forgotten movie that’s not relevant, but I guess you can still learn something from analyzing it and derive entertainment value from making fun of it.
G: How has doing Half in the Bag changed since the first episodes, and how might the format change in the future?
G: Are there other specific events you’d like to cover as you recently did B-Fest 2012?
S: Well, the set is in worse shape than it was in the first show!
S: We always wanted Half in the Bag to move beyond movie reviews and morph into whatever was interesting to us at the time, which is why we didn’t call it “Movie Beat” or a name like that.
S: But I guess the focus will always be related to geek and pop culture stuff since we’re both movie guys and that’s our audience.
S: We’d love to go to some of the bigger cons like San Diego and Dragon*Con or maybe some film festivals, too.
S: We have a lot of oddball ideas for future shows.
S: I think we’d also like to have more guests come on, but they would have to come to Milwaukee and no one wants to ever do that.
G: Unlike a lot of other online review shows, Half in the Bag clearly isn’t an audition piece for a mainstream program.
G: What’s been the reception in comparison to your expectations?
S: We didn’t really know what to expect as far as audience reaction, but our goal was always to make something polar opposite to what people were doing on the Internet.
S: That mixture of the bizarre rant and well-thought-out criticism works with Plinkett.
S: A lot of the geek culture stuff out there is the slick-looking G4-type programs with the fast-talking car salesmen host or the sexy geek girl type — flashy graphics, greenscreen, etc.
S: Our angle was to set Half in the Bag in a dilapidated old house and swear a lot.
S: Why not?
S: The reception at first was lukewarm because people were used to the Plinkett reviews, and Jay and I are both hideously ugly people who should never be on camera, but, like you said, it’s not an audition piece for a mainstream program; it’s kind of the antithesis of that.
S: Eventually, people warmed up and a good 12% of our audience now tolerates the show.
G: The Internet allows us all to “speak truth to power.” But those with the “power” have recently been trying to pass legislation to curb that voice.
G: As a critic, how does that make you feel?
G: And what about as the creator of intellectual property that you need to protect in order to make a living?
S: Is this question about SOPA?
S: I wanted to do a bit where Plinkett washed his website with a bar of “sopa” cause it was too “copy-ridden.” We never want to get to the guilty-until-proven-innocent stage in our society like some weirdo alien culture in Star Trek.
S: There are other ways to deal with copyright theft than some Chinese communist government-type methods.
S: Copyrights and the legal response to them will probably be outdated soon, as computers get faster and files get smaller.
S: It’ll be a war between who has the better encryption technology against who can break it.
S: Remixes and creating new art out of something else is fine, but outright stealing its intended entertainment value is something I wish people wouldn’t do.
G: OK, rank these 10 Hollywood franchises in order in terms of potential Plinkett reviewability: The Matrix, Terminator, Alien, James Bond, Twilight, Harry Potter, Jurassic Park, Mission: Impossible, Lord of the Rings and The Hobbit.
S: That answer is going to be waaaay too long!
