Apr 25, 2012
Millions follow fake movie reviewer and serial killer online
https://politiken.dk/kultur/film_og_tv/cphpix/art5057528/Millioner-f%C3%B8lger-falsk-filmanmelder-og-seriemorder-p%C3%A5-nettet
https://pastebin.com/wPPBKmeR

Sometimes it's even really hard to figure out what's getting millions and millions of people clicking on videos on YouTube.
 
Either videos of crazy dogs or cats are a hit.
Music videos with rap stars from all over the world.
Or videos with the latest goals scored in football matches by Messi or Ronaldo.
 
One of those who has experienced a bigger following on YouTube is the American film director Mike Stoklasa.
 
Since 2008, he has made so-called mock reviews (fake movie reviews) which are provided by the bitter, old man Mr. Pinklett, who is even a serial killer next to 'tjansen' as a tough film critic.
 
This week, Mike Stoklasa takes the trip from the USA to Copenhagen, where the film festival CPH PIX shows his cult films.
And where he himself will try to explain to the Danish film nerds what exactly his success is created by.
 
Dissection of Star Wars

The most famous of Mike Stoklasa's clips with Mr. Plinkett on YouTube is about George Lucas' Star Wars movie.
For example, the review of 'Star Wars Episode I: The Phantom Menace', a feature-length mock review, is about to round out four million views on YouTube.
 
"Star Wars Episode 3 (Revenge of the Sith) is the most disappointing since Star Wars episode 2."
"It's hard to get disappointed when your expectations are so low..."
"We all went in to see this movie, just to get it over with."
"At the end of the film, you laugh so much that you can't breathe."
"Is all these new Star Wars movies a practical joke?"
 
This is what Mr. Plinkett b.a. in the review.
With sharp humor, in addition to the Star Wars universe, he dissects films such as 'Star Trek', 'Indiana Jones' and 'Avatar'.
 
In the reviews, Mike Stoklasa constantly cross-cuts for private recordings, old film clips and advertisements for hotels in exotic locations.
 
Sounds like something from 'Eyes of Evil'
It's all made extremely low budget and intentionally looks cheap.
The twist is Mr. Plinkett's fictional identity is a story in itself.
 
I would have expected it to die out just like a lot of other models on the net.
 
Mike Stoklasa, film director

Mr. Plinkett is an old man (claiming to have been born in 1906) on the verge of being senile. He speaks in a driving language and his voice sounds like a mix of Dan Aykroyd's character in 'The Blues Brothers' or the evil character Buffalo Bill from 'Eyes of Evil'. You know, the one who kidnaps a girl and hides her down in a well in her house.
 
In the YouTube videos, Mr. Plinkett as a sick serial killer who really just spends his free time fabricating movie reviews.
 
He lives in New Jersey and a recurring theme in the YouTube videos is the story of how Mr. Plinkett has killed his various ex-wives and about the women he has held captive in his basement.
 
The instructor is surprised by his success.

"Does that sound strange?"
"It is."
"But there is a meaning to it all," Mike Stoklasa explains in an email interview with politiken.dk.
 
What has surprised you most in relation to the millions of people who watch your movies on YouTube?
 
'I'm surprised by it all, actually."
"But I'm probably most surprised by the longevity the movie reviews have had."
"People still 'discover' them to this day, even though it's been three years since the 'Phantom Menace' review was sent out."
"I would have expected it to die out just like a lot of other models on the net."
"But the traffic on our website is growing, so it's great," says Mike Stoklasa.
 
His films have not only been spread like wildfire on social networks.
Stoklasa himself has ended up on Filmakers Magazine's prestigious list of the most important talents in the American indie film community.
 
But he is not alone in his success, he points out.
 
"Mr. Plinkett was originally a character my friend Rich Evans played in some old short films we made."
"Plinkett then became a kind of amalgamation of some weird sounds and comic things we wanted out."
"The movie reviews on YouTube are really just mouthpieces for this idiot who complains a lot and says things that make no sense," says Mike Stoklasa.
 
The movie reviews on YouTube are really just mouthpieces for this idiot who complains a lot.
 
Mike Stoklasa
Filming in an abandoned house

What is the wildest thing that has happened during your productions of the fake movie reviews?
 
“The footage itself is pretty uneventful."
"A lot of it involves me shouting into a microphone in my apartment or sitting and editing and writing until well into the night."
"But the house we used as the 'Plinkett basement' was owned by one of our acquaintances."
"At one point, the house was empty and we had to lock ourselves in."
"There was no electricity or heat and the house was in a hard neighborhood."
"Those footage was under rather miserable and dangerous conditions."
"We constantly expected that a BZ with a knife or something would break into the middle of it all."
 
Do you also do other things than Mr. Plinkett's fake movie reviews?

We are currently working on a review series called 'Half in the Bag'.
We are also in full swing with our next feature film 'Space Cop'.
I will probably post another Plinkett review soon as well.
We are constantly busy with recordings and creating new, funny videos.
 
What do you most look forward to by having to visit Denmark?
 
"I'm really excited!"
"I've never actually been across the Atlantic, so this will be my first time going to mainland Europe."
"I've only heard nice things about Copenhagen, so I'm really looking forward to it."
"I am also excited to meet some new people at CPH PIX and see some of the other films at the festival," says Mike Stoklasa to politiken.dk.
