Jan 31, 2013
That Awful Film, Incredibly, Has a Following
https://archive.is/LLv5R (nytimes.com)

ON a cold night in early December a young crowd packed into the cozy 72-seat screening room at the 92Y TriBeCa.
The film that was about to be shown would be accompanied by live commentary from the hosts of “The Flop House,” a podcast dedicated to bad movies.
Those hosts were two moonlighting writers from “The Daily Show,” Dan McCoy and Elliott Kalan, and their laconic friend Stuart Wellington.
After a short introduction, the three sat in the front row as the lights went down.

The movie started, and Mr. McCoy’s voice came over the sound system.
“Oh, ‘Argo.’ I’d wanted to see this.”

This set up a big laugh for when the film’s actual title card appeared.
It read “Bratz: The Movie,” in a garish font.
The camera panned to a sunny cul-de-sac, then cut to a girl’s bedroom, where an ornate pink alarm clock started ringing.

“Wow, even their clocks have bratitude,” Mr. Kalan said, a deadpan reference to the shopworn portmanteau of the toy line Bratz.

The movie unspooled from there, a mix of consumerist fantasy (there are multiple sequences of girls trying on clothes), banal girl-power rhetoric and frequent moments of confounding badness.
Twenty minutes in, text appeared on the screen to say that the action was about to cut two years into the future for no discernible reason.
The crowd was apoplectic.
The commentators gave out halfhearted cries.
Mr. Kalan speculated that the movie was about to enter a post-apocalyptic future, but of course it immediately returned to a suburban high school.
“Bratz” is packed with weird moments like this, and they seemed to get more outlandish as the audience got more beery.

Funny, raucous bad-movie nights have become an important part of the 92Y TriBeCa’s programming.
The film programmer there, Cristina Cacioppo, estimated that one-fourth to half the slate of movies is made up of camp, though she said that’s often not deliberate.
“I programmed a singalong night for ‘Grease 2’ at one point,” Ms. Cacioppo said.
“But that’s because I sincerely liked that movie.” Most of the films don’t have an overlay of commentary, but there’s an unspoken pact that audience members can, within reason, add their own gibes to the soundtrack.

Ms. Cacioppo began programming these movies because she saw a dearth of formalized events in New York for fans of trash cinema when the 92Y opened in 2008.
Since then they have become more common.
The Landmark Sunshine Cinema on the Lower East Side hosts a screening of the cult hit “The Room” on the first Saturday of every month (that means this weekend), while the IFC Center in Greenwich Village will occasionally smuggle a turkey like “Red Dawn” (the Patrick Swayze version) into its otherwise impeccable Waverley Midnights schedule.
The Nitehawk Cinema in Brooklyn is also screening some duds this month, like the Indonesian action knockoff “Lady Terminator.” Both the Nitehawk and the 92Y have the added benefit of being licensed to serve alcohol.

Ms. Cacioppo said that her bad-movie nights quickly caught on with New Yorkers in their 20s and 30s, the type of cinephiles who grew up renting lousy VHS tapes and watching the cult cable show “Mystery Science Theater 3000.” At first Ms. Cacioppo would show bad movies on weeknights when the screening room had not been reserved.
But since then events like her Swayze Days of Summer series (featuring the most dubious hits from the 1980s star) have tended to get a stronger turnout at the 92Y than more serious-minded fare, like foreign-language films or small indie dramas.
Among the most anticipated events on the calendar are the periodic live riffing nights performed by the “Flop House” hosts.
(The podcast itself is usually recorded, without an audience, in Mr. McCoy’s Brooklyn apartment.)

Ms. Cacioppo said their “Bratz” event sold out faster than an appearance by Peter Bogdanovich in the same space earlier last year.
Their next show is Friday, when they will comment on the misguided Steve-Guttenberg-in-a-mullet romantic comedy “Don’t Tell Her It’s Me.”

“Dan used to actually organize screenings of good movies,” Mr. Kalan said of his “Flop House” colleague.
“But I think he realized it was harder to get people to come out for those.
With a bad movie it’s a social event.”

The podcast is silly and fun, even if the movies it examines are not.
“The Flop House” looks exclusively at contemporary bad movies made with large, corporate budgets.
According to Mr. Kalan that means most of the movies they watch are merely insipid, the kind of boring copycat film that can make up a good chunk of Hollywood’s output.
Regardless, the podcast is still a great listen for movie fans with a very particular sensibility.
Mr. Kalan has an encyclopedic film knowledge, and all three hosts offer deep genre-movie context.
They’re also adept improvisers, able to extrapolate riffs out of a movie’s most banal plot turns.

Bad-movie appreciation has a long history, some of which can be credited to “Mystery Science Theater 3000” (or in fan shorthand, “MST3K”), which ran from 1988 to 1999.
The show’s conceit revolved around an isolated spaceman and his robot companions, who by some sad twist of fate are forced to watch the worst movies ever made, everything from low-rent creature features to overheated martial-arts movies.
To stay sane the spaceman and his robots would riff their own comments over the movie, peppering their dialogue with pop culture in-jokes.
The comedian Patton Oswalt cited the show for helping him understand his own aesthetic.

“It reminded me a lot, before I could articulate it, of the kind of things being done by comedians I was hanging out with at the time,” Mr. Oswalt said.
“We were dealing with awful club owners, and we had to make it fun for ourselves somehow. That’s how we would talk to each other.”

Many of the writers involved in that show are still working in the bad-movie world.
RiffTrax, a company made up of “MST3K” alumni, has developed a successful business by selling these writers’ commentaries as MP3s.
They occasionally have shows beamed into movie theaters nationwide by Fathom Events, the same company that coordinates simulcasts of the Metropolitan Opera.
Joel Hodgson, the original host of “Mystery Science Theater,” tours the country with his own group, Cinematic Titanic, and even teaches a course on movie riffing.

The “MST3K” gang has inspired a large cohort of imitators.
“I do feel like bad-movie culture is more prominent now than it was in the 1990s,” said Nathan Rabin, the head writer for the Onion A.V. Club, who chronicles the pleasures of bad movies in his weekly column, My World of Flops.
Mr. Rabin cites the Internet for providing access to a deep historical reserve of bad movies, creating a more literate class of new fans who are eager to build community.

Today cities like Los Angeles, Austin, San Francisco and Portland, Ore., have regular performances by troupes of riffers.
The Web site Red Letter Media has gained attention for its bleak, film-length takedown “reviews” of the Star Wars prequels.
Particularly notorious bad movies, like “The Room” and “Birdemic: Shock and Terror,” have been filling theaters across the country for the past few years.

Bad-movie podcasts have also grown in number, if not necessarily quality.
Perhaps the most popular is “How Did This Get Made?,” a gabfest hosted by a trio of comic actors from Los Angeles.
The hosts have brought in famous names like Michael Ian Black, Kevin Smith and Vanilla Ice to share in their bafflement, and the show was recently named “one of the most reliable pleasures of the Internet” by no less a cultural authority than The New Yorker.
They occasionally do the podcast before an audience, and sold out two shows at the Bell House in Gowanus, Brooklyn, in December.

Mr. Oswalt cited that podcast as a favorite, in part because he said the hosts aren’t cynical but have an uncurdled enthusiasm for the most outlandish moments in films, the ones untethered from narrative logic or sanity, the kind of scenes that make certain movies, as Mr. Oswalt called them, “fun bad.”

“You can’t do it as a scold, or just for the sake of hating something,” he said “You actually have to revel in how godawful this is.”

This need to revel is why seeing bad movies in a theater or at a party, away from the isolation of your laptop, is so important.
While Web sites, podcasts and Amazon Instant provide many opportunities for bad-movie aficionados to get a fix, the best part of the subculture is the live event, when inexplicable plot turns and visual details are amplified by a laughing crowd.
These films work best as a social emulsifiers, common causes that unite people around questions, like “Why does John Travolta have dreadlocks in this?” or “Did Nicolas Cage actually read the script, or is he improvising his dialogue?” or “Seriously, how did this get made?”

“Nobody ever sets out to make a bad movie,” Mr. Oswalt said, “so when you laugh at a bad movie, you’re kind of whistling by the graveyard. You are confronting the movie and forcing enjoyment out of something bad. There’s something kind of beautiful about that.”

The fare:

DON’T TELL HER IT’S ME Friday, 8 p.m.,, 92Y TriBeCa, 200 Hudson Street, between Vestry and Canal Streets, TriBeCa; (212) 601-1000, 92y.org/Tribeca.

THE ROOM First Saturday of every month, midnight, Landmark Sunshine Cinema, 143 East Houston Street, between Forsyth and Eldridge Streets, Lower East Side; (888) 724-6362, landmarktheatres.com/market/newyork/sunshinecinema.htm.

THE TRIP Feb. 16, 7 p.m., 92Y Tribeca (information above).

LADY TERMINATOR Feb. 23 and 24, 12:10 a.m., Nitehawk Cinema, 136 Metropolitan Avenue, between Wythe Avenue and Berry Street, Williamsburg, Brooklyn; (718) 384-3980, nitehawkcinema.com.

Other sites that include screenings of bad movies:

CHELSEA CLEARVIEW CINEMAS 260 West 23rd Street, Manhattan; (212) 777-3456, clearviewcinemas.com.

IFC CENTER 323 Sixth Avenue, at Third Street, East Village; (212) 924-7771, ifccenter.com.

VIDEOLOGY 308 Bedford Avenue, at South First Street, Williamsburg, Brooklyn; (718) 782-3468, videology.info.

Online:

THE FLOP HOUSE flophousepodcast.com.

HOW DID THIS GET MADE? earwolf.com/show/how-did-this-get-made.

I LOVE BAD MOVIES Ilovebadmovies.com

MY WORLD OF FLOPS avclub.com/features/my-world-of-flops.

RED LETTER MEDIA redlettermedia.com.

RIFFTRAX rifftrax.com
