Oct 5, 2014
Why Sonic Needs To Slow Down
https://archive.vn/Ys7p9 (tay.kinja.com)

Sonic needs to slow down.

It is not a wholly, original thought that perhaps Sonic The Hedgehog's very name is a bit of a misnomer.
At their heart, Sonic games were never really about just running.
However, without resorting to internet memes or other cynical reflexes, separating exactly what makes a Sonic game fun from what makes it bad can actually be a somewhat tricky task.
This is likely because many of the finer points of the Sonic series are lost to longstanding perceptions of the games.

Most prominently, Sonic's legacy will forever be that of a game associated with speed, and understandably so.

But even after two decades and generations of new players, Sonic has always been at his best when he wasn't simply just running as fast as he could.

Let me explain why.

"So I come up with some ideas about events that are happening; how the player acts, you know, at each stage. What kind of results happen once you perform this or that gimmick in each level..."

"So this is the idea for a section, and I make a picture or a scan of what kind of image I have going, add some simple comments, and make a document that I bring to the artists and programmers. These are all concepts."

These are answers to questions posed in a fascinating 2008 Gamasutra interview with game designer Hirokazu Yasuhara.
He is explaining in detail many of the design considerations for what, from the vantage point of the architect for the original Sonic The Hedgehog games, makes a compelling gameplay experience.

Hirokazu Yasuhara is best known as one third of the original Sonic Team trio, alongside Naoto Oshima and Yuji Naka.
The fly-on-the-wall story that has persisted across time is this: Sega tasked these three designers to come up with a game that featured a marketable lead, in order that Sega may have a flagship mascot.
Several failed attempts followed.
Naka persistently wanted to create a game that would incorporate the element of speed, so Oshima integrated Naka's general idea into a character design.
This would eventually become a blue, running hedgehog.

And Yasuhara? Yasuhara designed their new mascot's labyrinths.

The politics between Sega of Japan and Sega of America, as well as the stories of Sonic the Hedgehog's contention with Nintendo are oft told tales, most recently in the curiously narrated novel Console Wars: Sega, Nintendo, and the Battle that Defined a Generation.
Without retreading the lengthy legwork there, and other places that retell this famous history, let's boil this down to what many people already know:

Sonic the Hedgehog needed to be an answer to Mario the Plumber, and the Sega Genesis had quite a sexy engine under that sleek, black exterior.
