Dec 17, 2015
Before 'The Force Awakens,' Here's How to Bury the Hatchet with the Star Wars Prequels
https://archive.vn/IsAHl (mashable.com)

You may have heard that a little movie called The Force Awakens is barreling towards theaters around the world with all the terrifying power of a Death Star laser beam.
You may also have heard that it's pretty darn good.

Which means that we can finally bury the hatchet with George Lucas' Episodes I, II and III, released between 1999 and 2005 and commonly known as the prequels.
As of Thursday night, the most recently released Star Wars movie will no longer be Episode III: Revenge of the Sith.

Our new hope is that the dark times of fanboy arguments over the prequels will now draw to a close.

Plenty of moviegoers liked the prequels — hey, someone was buying all those tickets.
(Unadjusted for inflation, the prequel trilogy brought in $2.5 billion at the box office worldwide, outselling the original trilogy.)
Plenty more really, really did not like them.
This post is designed to help that latter group get some closure so they can start afresh with The Force Awakens.

But first, I know what a lot of you are thinking — you're preparing to post in the comments links to the Red Letter Media reviews of the prequels.
These videos feature an angry serial killer character named Mr. Plinkett who tears the three prequels apart in hour-long rants.
Plinkett was the creation of a Milwaukee-based filmmaker called Mike Stoklasa, and his videos have racked up nearly 50 million views over the last 6 years.

But Plinkett is not going to help you get closure, just more anger.
And as any Jedi Master will tell you, anger leads to the Dark Side.
Far better to take a more creative and positive approach, like the folks below.

[1. Make a better movie in your mind.]

In 2012, a former Nickelodeon child star named Michael Barryte returned home from a screening of Episode I: The Phantom Menace 3D re-release.
It reminded him of the disappointment he and his friends had experienced at the age of 12, when the original Phantom Menace was released (so much for George Lucas' frequent claim that "kids love the prequels").
He turned to YouTube to vent his frustration.

"I didn't want to just pan the film," Barryte told Mashable, referring to the Plinkett reviews.
"I've been trying to skew more positive."

The result: "What if Episode I Was Good?", a YouTube video that went viral and has since been viewed nearly 3 million times.
In 12 minutes, the effusive Barryte goes through the script of the film and suggests simple changes — the removal of Jar Jar, the aging of Anakin, the survival of Darth Maul, other small tweaks that turn Obi-Wan into the hero, and an inspired take on what to do with Senator Palpatine.

His fans began clamoring for a follow-up.
Barryte, more of a movie fan in general than a Star Wars fan in particular, had never intended to make one.
But in 2013, he relented.
The result, "What if Episode II Were Good?" got another million views in the space of a week, and Barryte began to be bombarded with emails from fans with their own alternate script ideas.
“I unknowingly swatted the biggest hornet’s nest in fandom,” he says.

Finally, on Tuesday, Barryte released the third and final piece of the puzzle, "What if Episode III Were Good?" By this point the butterfly effect of decisions made in his first video have resulted in a very different movie indeed.

We'll never get to see this alternate trilogy in theaters, but your imagination is the best screening room ever.

[2. Laugh it up, fuzzball.]

As I've pointed out before, one of the biggest strengths of Star Wars is its sense of humor.
In the original trilogy, the humor is deadpan, and the dozens of excellent, loving spoofs show how easily its bizarre setup and strange characters can tip over to full-blown comedy.

The humor was somewhat lacking in the prequels, of course — well, if you don't count Gungan pratfalls.
So the Brooklyn-based duo known as the Auralnauts decided to use the Force of comedy — as well as dance remixes — to produce an entirely different take on the prequels.

This is overdubbing, but not the utterly surreal version you know from Bad Lip Reading.
There's an actual coherent story unfolding in these videos, one in which C-3PO — here renamed Creepio — is actually the prime mover of evil in the Star Wars universe.
You'll never be able to see the golden droid in the same way again.

"When we watch movies, sometimes things will happen that don’t make sense to us, like a half finished robot being turned on while still missing most of his face," write the Auralnauts by way of explanation.

"When that happens, we stop paying attention to the movie and come up with a story that makes us feel better, like said robot being irreparably traumatized by the experience.

"Sometimes these jokes are more interesting to us than the stories themselves, and we feel compelled to share them."

As genius as the Creepio plot twist is, the highlight is the music: the thumping techno remix of the Darth Maul-Jedi duel called "Dance of the Fates"; the perfect 1980s big hair video "In the Friend Zone"; Anakin and Obi-Wan jamming along to "Mama Said Knock You Out" before their final dance fight on Mustafar.

And here's a bonus: the Auralnauts recently continued the story with their epic take on Episode IV, "Laser Moon Awakens." It might help you get over your prequel pain by showing how dumb a lot of scenes in the original movie can seem, too — from a certain point of view.

3. Remember, they're just movies — and this was George's vision all along.
If mental remakes and laughter can't ease your pain, maybe it's time you gained a sense of perspective.

In 1981, while exhausted and writing a movie then called "Revenge of the Jedi," George Lucas gave the longest interview of his career.
His message to the fans was clear: stop analyzing.
"Star Wars is just a movie," he told the readers of science fiction magazine Starlog.
“The people who are saying ‘It’s nothing, it’s junk food for the mind’ are reacting to the people saying ‘This is the greatest thing since popcorn!’

“Both of them are wrong. It’s just a movie. You watch it and you enjoy it ... like a sunset. You don’t have to worry about the significance. You just say ‘hey, that was great.’”

Conversely, if you don't like a Lucas movie, you can just say "hey, that sucked." There doesn't have to be any greater significance.
No one's childhood is ruined.
The James Bond movie franchise has survived for 53 years, and contains many stinkers.
The good movies are unaffected.

As I pointed out in my spoiler-free review of The Force Awakens, there have always been two kinds of Star Wars — George Lucas' original vision, the goofy Flash Gordon pastiche filled with spaceships and funny aliens and intergalactic politics, and the version we saw.

Lucas didn't have the time, money or technology to fully realize his vision in the original trilogy.
He did with the prequels, which were utterly unfiltered.
That's what he wanted to do all along, for better or worse, and it is well that we have a definitive historical version of it.

With Thursday's release of The Force Awakens, the prequels comprise less than half of Star Wars' cinematic canon.
With every future release, they will become a smaller and smaller segment of the whole, fading away like a sunset.
