Nov 1, 2017
6 Outrageous Ways Hollywood Can (and Will) Screw You Over
http://archive.vn/3s8hh (cracked.com)

The Conjuring Offered A "Contest" For Sequel Ideas Where The Prize Was $50 And No Credit
Horror film series The Conjuring has had an absurd number of spinoffs centered on seemingly every side character or object that's appeared in the main franchise.
They made two movies about that spooky Annabelle doll that showed up in a prologue in the first movie.
They made a movie about the demonic nun who turns up occasionally in the sequel.
They're making one that's about the Crooked Man ghost that climbs out of a children's toy.
It's gotten to the point where Warner Bros. is now calling on Conjuring fans (known as "Conjurers" or "Warreners") pick the next piece of Conjuring scenery that gets its own movie.
In fact, a contest called "My Annabelle Creation" recently wrapped up.
It invited budding filmmakers to make a short film based on the Conjuring franchise.

Red Letter Media co-creator Mike Stoklasa discovered the contest and figured it might be a fun project for RLM to submit their own entry, as a gag if nothing else.
That's when Stoklasa did what few people ever bother to do and read the legal fine print on the contest's website.
Buried under almost 8,000 words of legal gobbledygook, it states:

Each entrant agrees that, in addition to the license granted above, sponsor (or any of sponsor's parents, affiliates, or subsidiaries) may, upon written notice to entrant at any time within approximately three (3) months of the verification of the winner in this contest, acquire from entrant an exclusive and irrevocable option to purchase all right, title and interest in and to his or her entrant content ("option") in exchange for fifty U.S. dollars.

In regular language, that means that if you win the contest, Warner Bros. immediately owns your idea and gets to strip you of all credit in return for a crisp $50 bill.
The contract goes on to state that if they eventually decide to adapt your film into a full-length movie, they will slam down another $50 bill.
And then never speak to you again.

You don't need a spreadsheet to tell you that's hot bullshit, at best a tiny fraction of what you might have spent making the video in the first place.
But there is one other part of the prize we didn't mention: getting flown out to LA to meet with David Sandberg, the Annabelle: Creation director, personally.
So that's still something.
Except the contract also stipulates that if he can't fit you into his schedule that day, he won't meet you, and "no substitute or replacement will be provided."
Oh.
So that's now literally nothing.
