Dec 19, 2017
The End Is Night Is a More Brainy Brutal Platformer
https://archive.is/WcSL9 (geek.com)

When I reviewed Gonner on Nintendo Switch a few months ago I called it “Tim Burton’s Super Meat Boy.” And while I stand by that comparison, I may have spoken a little too soon.
The End is Nigh is also a super tight and tough 2D platformer with a creepy cute cartoon art style.
But it was also co-developed by Edmund McMillen (along with Tyler Glaiel), one of the actual creators of Super Meat Boy.
Regardless of whether or not it deserves my dumb analogy, The End is Nigh adds a cool cerebral edge to breakneck brutal platforming.

If Super Meat Boy was a cheery snarky cartoon for the real-life Bart Simpsons of the world, The End is Nigh goes fully into the M-rated teenage nihilism end of the Newgrounds spectrum.
You play as a tumorous little blob named Ash (voiced by Red Letter Media’s Rich Evans of all hilarious people) scouring his blighted post-apocalyptic world for friends and video game cartridges to entertain himself.

The different environments feel distinct, from oceans of acid urine to harsh deserts.
But they are united by a magnificently miserable monochrome art style, like all the joy has been sucked away along with the color.
It’s great for anyone who wishes Limbo’s haunting silhouettes were more unapologetically vulgar.
In a way, it feels like the missing link between Super Meat Boy and McMillen’s other smash scatalogical hit The Binding of Isaac.

That applies to the gameplay as well.
Meat Boy would constantly die because he, and the player, loved flinging himself at danger to succeed, and then always trying again when he failed.
It was a mark of pride to see all of your previous deaths play out at once before a victory.
There’s a slight philosophical shift in The End is Nigh.
Here you constantly die because that’s just the nature of your awful world.
You should expect it, you shouldn’t be afraid of it, but maybe you should think a little more about how to avoid it.

The End is Nigh gives you pitch-perfect precise platforming physics and fluid controls, so it expects you to use them.
Angling yourself just the right amount in the air can mean the difference between a safe landing and death by spikes.
Unlike Meat Boy, you can’t scale walls forever by jumping.
Instead, you have to look out for carefully placed hooks to hold onto.
It’s just one way the gameplay is more about methodically observing patterns and solving the jump puzzles rather than winning through sheer skillful acrobatics.
Hop on enemy heads to cross a chasm.
Wait in the poison cloud for just the right amount of time.
Navigate towers as they collapse.

The game even features some light exploratory backtracking.
Levels are largely single-screen obstacle courses but they all exist in a linear interconnected world.
And if you go out through the entrance of one level you appear at the end of the previous level.
Working your way backwards like this is the only way to grab some especially tricky collectibles.

Unfortunately, there’s no way to individually select levels.
You have to go through the entire world.
And if you warp back to an earlier world without finishing the one you started, you have to tediously start back at the beginning.
Levels are short and fun enough to replay, especially on the go with Nintendo Switch, but this is a very frustrating choice/oversight for a game this challenging.

And honestly, as deviously clever and mechanically satisfying as The End is Nigh can be, it just made me want to go back and revisit the raw platforming thrills of Super Meat Boy.
It made me wish the Switch version of that game, or its upcoming sequel, was out right now.
Think of The End is Nigh as a cool B-side of a game from McMillen.
