Jun 21, 2017
Atlanta's Videodrome Is the Last and Greatest Video Rental Store
https://archive.vn/ZYrsn (geek.com)

Video rental stores are dead.
It’s sad from a nostalgic perspective, but it was inevitable once Netflix, Hulu, and other on-demand streaming services came out.
In some parts of the country, you can still glimpse the desiccated husks of old Blockbusters, rustling with the whispers of dead business models.

Then, driving through Atlanta last week, I found the new flesh.
There is one great video rental store out there, and it’s in Atlanta’s Little Five Points neighborhood.
That store is Videodrome, and it’s fantastic.

You know it’s special from the title itself, referring to the David Cronenberg classic and one of James Woods’ best roles next to him playing a nihilism-fueled omnicidal parallel universe Batman.
The logo of a head with tape reel glasses over the eyes is pretty strong, too.
And once you walk in and see the shelves, you immediately understand how it still exists and why it’s great.

The new releases wall has some big blockbusters (which, after they’re taken off that shelf, get relegated to their own section with appropriate commercial reverence), but they’re surrounded by the obscure, indie, foreign and just plain weird.
May 23rd’s new releases include Get Out, Logan, and Great Wall, alongside the all-female horror anthology XX, a French drama about Tamil refugees Dheepan, and the new Blu-ray releases of the 1975 Yakuza film Cops Vs. Thugs and 1988 Frank Henenlotter comedy horror Brain Damage.

Haven’t heard of those films?
Neither have I, and that’s great.
It’s a taste of the full spectrum of art house and schlock that Videodrome offers.
If you want the full meal, you need to dive into the different sections.

First, there are the Asian films.
It’s more than just Kung Fu movies (though there are plenty).
There are Japanese, Chinese, and Korean comedies, dramas, and horror movies, both new and old.
Do you want to binge on Kim Ki Duk’s classics?
He has half a shelf.
And don’t worry, several-of-my-jaded-coworkers: Anime is in another section, along with kaiju films.

The international movies don’t stop in Asia.
Denmark, Finland, Holland, Ireland, Norway, and Serbia all have shelves.
Yes, there are more Serbian films than A Serbian Film, and they’re not all like that one.

If you have favorite directors, they probably have shelves, too.
Carpenter, Cronenberg, Gondry, Jonze, Lynch, you name it.
If they made something with a vision, especially if that vision was weird, there’s a section in Videodrome.

Beyond the artsy, foreign, indie, and “films made by filmmakers” movies, there’s the shlock.
The delicious, delicious shlock.
Videodrome lets you start at Sweet Sweetback’s Baadasssss Song and work your way down.
You bet there’s a Blaxploitation shelf.
It’s two shelves above the Ausploitation shelf.
And it’s across from the really, really gross Italian horror movies.
You can binge on Lucio Fulci and Dario Argento’s films, and watch as many Zombi sequels as there are alternate titles on IMDB.

To enjoy this great wealth of esoteric cinema, you need to live in Atlanta or otherwise be staying there for a few days.
Besides a small stack of DVDs and Blu-rays you can buy, Videodrome is rental-only.
That means you pay a few dollars, take the video for a few days, then bring it back.
Which seems like a really weird concept in 2017, but it’s the best way to find and enjoy new and obscure movies that you’ll never stumble upon with Netflix.

Videodrome is a marvel of weird movies of all stripes and from all ages.
If you love foreign films, if you eat up obscure movies from the silent era to the 80s, if you have a favorite director who hasn’t generated a billion dollars for his studio, or if you recognize the names Rich Evans, Diamanda Hagan, Brad Jones, or Kyle Kalgren.
If you find yourself in Atlanta, you owe it to yourself to visit Videodrome.
